In the last lecture, we added a fallback to directly send the data if our browser doesn't support service
workers or the sync manager,
now I also want to make sure that we do send data in the service worker though.
So to send a request from inside the service worker, we'll go into this file and there, I'll register
a new event, I'll do this here at the very bottom of this file,
so with self add event listener, I listen to the sync event and as I explained on the slide, this event will
be executed whenever the service worker believes it reestablished connectivity or that will also
fire if the connectivity was always there
as soon as a new sync task was registered.
So whenever the service worker thinks it has connectivity and it has an outstanding synchronization
task, it will trigger this event.
Now in this event here which we of course also passed to the function, I want to basically now send
a request to the server because at this point of time, I know that we have an internet connection. So
to do that, I'll first of all log something here so that we can see it's working,
so service worker is doing something here,
it's background syncing and we can put the event here to to get some extra information.
That of course doesn't add any useful logic though,
the first thing I want to do is I want to check the event tag.
In theory, we could have multiple event tags and you probably want to do different things for the different
events.
So right now in feed.js,
I have a tag of sync
new post
and of course I want to handle this specific task now with a specific way of sending the data and also
the tag defines which data I want to send
most of the time. To check the tag, I'll use an if statement, access the event
and there, there is a tag property and I'll check if this is sync new post, of course has to be written
in the exact same way as in the feed.js file where I registered it.
So if we do have this event here, then I want to do something specific
and if you have different tags or different synchronization tests, you probably want to use a switch
case statement to do different things for the different events. Here
I'll first of all output a log message again to show that I am in the
right
part of this event listener so to say and here I will say syncing new posts and it should be clear then
that the if statement successfully gave me access. Then I'll use event wait until just as before,
this simply allows me to make sure that the event doesn't finish preemptively but that it waits for
this to finish
and for what to finish?
Well for me sending the data of course. For that, I first of all need to read the data in the sync posts in
my indexedDB, that is where I stored it, right?
Here with writeData, we stored it in sync posts.
Now thankfully in our utility function, we have that read all data function which is just what we need.
So inside there, I'll call read all data, of course on the sync posts store
and then I want to use that data.
So I'll have a function here which gives me that data and now I want to send this to my server
and that actually is pretty comparable to the code we have in feed.js.
So I will copy that from the send data method here,
copy that code with the fetch statement, go to the service worker and paste it in there and we need to
finetune it
but generally, the logic is the same. I'm inside
the event callback on read all data
and now, I of course need to populate all these fields.
Now I'll take the ID from my data store here,
however keep in mind, we might have multiple posts in the store, multiple posts
we need to synchronize because maybe the user submitted multiple posts while no internet connection
was there,
so we definitely need to loop through all the data pieces. So I'll store this in a dt variable and I'll
use a for/of loop here in the service worker
since browsers supporting service workers also support for/of loops.
Now here are my IDE does complain that I'm using the wrong Javascript version,
you can always fall back to normal for loop but here I know the browsers executing
this code will support for/of.
So I'll take my fetch method and add it into this loop
and here again, I get access to all the posts which are queued up for synchronisation. I'll then first
of all output or store
the ID here by accessing dt.id and dt will just refer to an individual entry in my indexedDB
sync posts store
and of course I'll follow this pattern here for all the other things too.
dt.title gives me access to the title, dt.location gives me access to the location
and I'm getting this data from here in feed.js
where I queue this up to store it.
I store the ID, title and location,
I store all of that with writeData,
well this is what I'm extracting now in the service worker, ID title and location and I'll hardcode the image
for now,
later we'll store this too
once we know how to take an image. So that's the data I want to send, the rest of the request
actually is just the same, however here in the then block after sending the request,
I'll of course not update the UI because we don't have access to the DOM here, this update UI method won't
work here.
Instead what I want to do here is, I want to clean up my sync post object store in indexedDB because
now we handled the queue, we handled all queued up posts,
of course I want to remove it
or actually we didn't handle all of them but since we execute this in the for loop, I have to delete
each post for which we handle that.
So here to make sure that this works, I can use another method from my utility.js file and
that is delete item from data, we haven't used it yet but it's exactly what we need now.
We passed the store from which we want to delete an item and the ID of the item and we have both here. So
in then block after executing this request, we know we did successfully send the request to the server
now,
so now we can clean it up.
Well to be super safe,
I'll check if OK is true on the response,
OK is a helper property provided on the response object which indicates if the response code is in the
200 area which means it was successful.
Now in there, I want to call this helper method in utility.js, delete item from data which allows
us to delete an element from indexedDB and I want to delete the element we just handled in this for
loop iteration for which we just sent the request. So here I will now execute
delete item from data on the sync post object store in indexedDB and the item I want to delete is dt.id,
this ID here of this current loop iteration.
As a side note, we will later enhance this and get back the ID from the server which is much safer since
we then definitely execute the right code on the right response,
this will be something we add in future modules of this course where we basically will change the way our
code executes on the server
a little bit.
So for now, I'll use this ID here though
and delete it from my indexedDB.
And with that, we did all that clean up work,
if the response isn't OK, then I don't want to purge it from my store because then we definitely need
to try again the next time the connectivity re-established
and if this request fails, so if we are not inside then but we catch it basically,
well then we can output some error message in the log or do whatever we want but it definitely also
don't want to clear this from my indexedDB because we have to try again. So only make sure to clear your
indexedDB here in the then block after sending your post request with fetch only if the response is OK. And
that is the code for a service worker to react to this sync event, get the data we stored in indexedDB, loop through it
send a post request for each of the data pieces be stored and then delete it from indexedDB
if we successfully sent it to the server. Let's now try this out. For that, I'll go back to my application
and I will clear the storage and reload the page,
alternatively close the tab and open a new tab
and now let's see if this works.
If I open this and I enter some title here and some location here and I click post, we get an error,
cannot read showSnackBar of undefined. The reason for this is in our feed.js file, snack back
container, well that should be the snack bar container
first of all and then here, material snack bar,
so a little typo.
Sorry about that, so this should now be cleaned up and let's quickly clear the storage.
Make sure to clear this well or bump up that static cache version and reload your tab, close it and open
new tab but don't just close and open the tab without bumping up the static
version, that won't work.
So now we set this up, register the new code,
let's try this again, some title and some location and hit post, you should see that is background sync now.
Now if you don't see this for the very first time after you added this feature, you might need to turn
off your Wi-Fi connection and really do that,
don't just go offline here, that won't simulate with background sync, that's important,
offline here won't trigger it. Really go offline on your machine by turning off your Wi-Fi or your internet
connection and re-enabling it
and then this should occur, if it doesn't occur immediately, in the future it should keep on occurring immediately.
And with that we now set this up or we see that it's fired,
however we see that it doesn't really do it though. Now that it's related to a little typo, the tag is
sync
new post,
that is the tag we stored in feed.js.
Here when we registered this sync new post, that should be new posts with an S at the end because that is
what we're also listening to in the service worker,
sync new posts,
that's the tag we're checking.
This shows the importance of really being careful about this, so it's a good mistake here, that's why
I left it in,
definitely make sure your tags are equal.
Now we can confirm that under the application tab if we inspect the indexedDB database by refreshing it,
we do have that sync post stored where we have one post stored up or queued up.
So now with that adjusted, with the tag adjusted in feed.js,
let me clear the storage again
since I changed something in my normal Javascript code, reload the application or as before
bump up the static cache version, close the tab and
open a new one and now I will again execute
this with some title and some location, post.
Now it's firing
and now you see the server responded with 401.
Now that's a good thing actually because it means it tried to send it but we weren't authorised,
that's the response, unauthorised.
So the background synchronization task worked,
the only thing is that on Firebase, we're not allowed to send data to it.
Now that can be changed under database rules
and here right now
write
access is only given to users who are authenticated. Now I will set this to true to allow to everyone, in a real
application you want to use this carefully of course because you probably have some way of user authentication
in your app and having this check is fine but then your users would be authenticated and you could attach
this authorisation information to the request we're sending. Here
we don't have that feature though,
so I will enable it for everyone.
Now with this changed, we can go back and reload here
and by the way you will see that in indexedDB, it still has this queued up because we didn't clear it because
the request wasn't successful,
so exactly what we wanted and now we could either make sure we get connectivity again,
it will try again later at some point
but to speed this up, I will simply send a second request, some location to send post,
now it sent two requests which made sense because two were queued up,
now if we refresh indexedDB, close our developer tools here to get a really refreshed view of it, you see
only one is there.
Now that is simply related to the way we're clearing it,
we're doing this in a for loop and if you aware of how Javascript works, then this ID here will always
refer to the latest iteration,
it doesn't refer to the iteration you executed in because this is asynchronous code,
so this will execute after the whole loop finished, that is why
we will later fix this by using the ID we get back from the server.
Right now this isn't working as it should be, isn't working correctly,
I'll clearly add this here, it's only clearing the latest ID,
not the ID of the item we really send the request for. Sending the request does work though, if
we inspect it here in our database, under posts you see we have two new posts,
this cryptic ID is generated by Firebase automatically,
we have our own ID in there though if you want to use that and you can see the values are different
so it sent the correct requests,
it's only the cleanup which doesn't work correctly due to the way Javascript for loops work and
especially how they work when combined with asynchronous code.
Overall, this is working though,
we are successfully synchronizing that,
we haven't seen it work offline though.
So let's quickly do that too and for that, I'll first of all manually clear this one element here in my
store
because as I just said, this simply should be gone, doesn't work due to the way Javascript works.
Now I will turn off my Wi-Fi connection and again, you have to do this, going offline here doesn't
do the trick,
you have to be really offline
and now I will post some title and some location three, post it,
it was stored for syncing
and now let's go back online.
So I will turn on my Wi-Fi
and then we see, it is indeed triggered, the request is sent,
we see it here on Firebase, some location three, some title three was added
and if I reload my application here, we also see all these new items which are now being fetched because
we now pass them to our back-end.
So that's really really cool,
this is now working as it should.
Now in the next lectures or in the next modules, we will fine tune our back-end code, change it,
we will also find a way to return some data here from the request when we get it on
our back-end
but this is already background synchronization working, both when we're online and offline as you saw
and this is a very powerful tool
you should definitely have in your toolbox.